First version of the PEP (#2)
we-like-parsers/peps: pep-3157.txt

PEP: 3157
Title: Syntactic formalization of f-strings
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Pablo Galindo <pablogsal@python.org>,
        Batuhan Taskaya <batuhan@python.org>,
        Lysandros Nikolaou <lisandrosnik@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Pablo Galindo <pablogsal@python.org>
Discussions-To: python-dev@python.org
Type: Standards Track
Status: Draft
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Python-Version: 3.9
Created: 15-Nov-2021

Abstract
========

This document proposes to lift some of the restrictions originally formulated in
:pep:`498` and to provide a formalized grammar for f-strings that can be

> integrated into parser directly. The proposed syntactic formalization of

Reviewer: Should we rephrase it by initially emphasizing that this is about formalization (instead of lifting/relaxing the f-string grammar) and then mention that through this we can lift restrictions imposed originally because of the implementation (potentially with a link pointing towards the section the changes are covered)?

Author: I agree, but I don't want that it seems that we are "hiding" the new stuff. For the end users the most impactful part of this PEP is, actually, lifting the restrictions so in some way that's going to be the one we should clarify more, I think.

f-strings will have some small side-effects over how f-strings are parsed and
interpreted, allowing for a considerable number of advantages for end users and
library developers, while also improving dramatically the maintainance cost of
the code dedicated to parse f-strings.

Motivation
==========

When f-strings were originally introduced in :pep:`398` the specification was
provided without providing a formal Grammar for f-strings. Additionally, theGG

> specification contains several restrictions that are imposed so the parsing of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When f-strings were originally introduced in :pep:`498` the specification was
provided without providing a formal grammar for f-strings. Additionally, the
specification contains several restrictions that are imposed so the parsing of
```

f-strings could be implemented into CPython without modifying the existing
lexer. These limitations have been recognized previously and previous attempt
have been made to lift them in :pep:`536` but non of this work was ever implemented 
(see [2]_). Some of these limitations (collected originally by :pep:`536`) are:

#. It is impossible to use the quote character delimiting the f-string
   within the expression portion::

    >>> f'Magic wand: { bag['wand'] }'
                                 ^
    SyntaxError: invalid syntax

#. A previously considered way around it would lead to escape sequences
   in executed code and is prohibited in f-strings::

    >>> f'Magic wand { bag[\'wand\'] } string'
    SyntaxError: f-string expression portion cannot include a backslash

> #. (TODO: DO WE WANT THIS?) Comments are forbidden even in multi-line f-strings::

Reviewer: Ideally a similar example would be this:
 ```py
 # Valid
func(
    a = 1, # comment
)

# Invalid
func(
    a = 1, # comment)

# Valid
func(
    a = 1, # comment)
) # <======= the parentheses above is not included 
```

But I am not super sure about what happens when either the enclosing parentheses is found inside the comment or the enclosing string literals.

```py
# Valid
f'''A complex trick: {
    bag['bag']  # recursive bags!
}'''

# Completely invalid
f'''A complex trick: {
    bag['bag']  # recursive bags!}
'''

# Completely invalid
f'''A complex trick: {
    bag['bag']  # recursive bags!}'''

# Potentially valid
f'''A complex trick: {
    bag['bag']  # recursive bags!}
}''' # <=== paren is still here, because the one above is ignored

# Potentially valid
f'''A complex trick: {
    bag['bag']  # recursive bags!}'''
}''' # <=== the triple quotes above does not close the string, this one does
```

Should we decide on this?

Author: > when either the enclosing parentheses is found inside the comment or the enclosing string literals.

I think the more predictable way is that everything after the comment is just ignored, which means that if there is a "}" after the comment then is just ignored and part of the comment, which means that you still need an extra "}" as in the last example. Do you see any problems with this?

Reviewer 2: agree with @pablogsal, ignoring everything after the `#` seems reasonable.

Reviewer 2: agree with @pablogsal, ignoring everything after the `#` seems reasonable.

Reviewer: Makes sense. My confusion was around `#` is completely ignored inside triple quoted strings, but considering you are starting it from an expression context and then trying to move to a string context it makes sense to `# ...` would omit everything in that line from the parser. 👍🏻

    >>> f'''A complex trick: {
    ... bag['bag']  # recursive bags!
    ... }'''
    SyntaxError: f-string expression part cannot include '#'

#. (TODO: DO WE WANT THIS?) Expression portions need to wrap ``':'`` and ``'!'`` in braces::

    >>> f'Useless use of lambdas: { lambda x: x*2 }'

>     SyntaxError: unexpected EOF while parsing

Reviewer 2: I'm somewhat torn on this, I feel that if we present the lambda as the example, support will be for not allowing it, since defining (and calling) a lambda in an f-string does not present a use case that makes sense. Are there any other examples we could use maybe?

Author: I added it here to discuss it together but I think this is cursed. One of the reasons is that the : defined the format specifier and we need to parse that as a string but if we allow that chunk to be tokenised normally it will never match sone of the allowed format specifiers because those are invalid combinations of alphanumeric characters.

This means that the tokenizer will always emit a FSTRING_MIDDLE and the lambda will never parse.

Author: @isidentical @lysnikolaou thoughts?

Reviewer: > One of the reasons is that the : defined the format specifier and we need to parse that as a string but if we allow that chunk to be tokenised normally it will never match sone of the allowed format specifiers because those are invalid combinations of alphanumeric characters.

I guess that's true. I was thinking about how we can circumvent it, but without a direct feedback (or at least coupling with) from the parser (which I know we don't want to do) I don't see a way around it. I also agree with @lysnikolaou that this would not be a particularly good example, so I'd be inclined to change this example (or drop it).

Author: I guess we could do something like what we do with the f-string debug expressions and grab the source directly even if is a lot of random tokens and then build a string with that. We would need a special parser rule than can eat any number of tokens until a given one, which is possible but I don’t know if is worth it

Reviewer: > I guess we could do something like what we do with the f-string debug expressions and grab the source directly even if is a lot of random tokens and then build a string with that.

That's true too! I didn't think about it purely because I was thinking about unlike debug expressions the format spec is not a formal python expression.

> We would need a special parser rule than can eat any number of tokens until a given one, which is possible but I don’t know if is worth it

In the event that we also formalize the ['format specification mini-language'](https://docs.python.org/3/library/string.html#formatspec) right in the parser for f-strings, it might be worth it (so we wouldn't do weird any-token eater rules) but I'd recommend it as a subsequent (and minor) improvement which bases itself on this. 

My vote is for deferring this case (particularly where a top-level colon is used, [assuming this doesn't affect colon-equal?]) for this PEP to the future with a recommendation/mention that it is possible to do but might require either the any-token approach you mentioned or a formalization of the format spec language in the grammar which would be a separate feature that'd need this PEP.

Reviewer 2: > We would need a special parser rule than can eat any number of tokens until a given one, which is possible but I don’t know if is worth it

I'm probably also for "it's not worth it", so dropping this altogether (at least for now) makes sense to me.

> In the event that we also formalize the ['format specification mini-language'](https://docs.python.org/3/library/string.html#formatspec) right in the parser for f-strings, it might be worth it (so we wouldn't do weird any-token eater rules) but I'd recommend it as a subsequent (and minor) improvement which bases itself on this.

I would be +1 on this exactly as presented. We can start off with what we have now and improve over it later.

Author: Ok, let's move it then to "rejected ideas" or something similar. Are you ok with that?

Reviewer: Agreed.

Reviewer 2: Yup, let's move to rejected ideas.

Author: Done

#. Arbitrary nesting of expressions without expansion of escape sequences is
   available in every single other language employing a string interpolation
   method that uses expressions instead of just variable names. [6]_

These limitations serve no purpose from a language user perspective and
can be lifted by giving f-literals a regular grammar without exceptions
and implementing it using dedicated parse code.

> The other problems that f-strings have is that the current implementation in
> CPython relies on the existing string parsing machinery and a post processing of
> its tokens. This has the following problems:

Reviewer 2: I guess the point here is that f-string get tokenised as `STRING` tokens, but I had to go through the sentence twice to understand it. Maybe something like this would be better:

```suggestion
The other problems that f-strings have is that the current implementation in
CPython relies on tokenising f-string as `STRING` tokens and a post processing of
these tokens. This has the following problems:
```

#. It adds a considerable maintainance cost to the CPython parser. This is because
   the parsing code needs to be written by hand, which has historically lead to a
   considerable number of inconsistencies and bugs. Writing and maintaining parsing
   code by hand in C has always been considered error prone and dangerous as it needs
   to deal with a lot of manual memory management over the original lexer buffers.

#. The f-string parsing code is not able to use the new improved error message mechanisms

>    that the new PEG parser originally introduced in :pep:`617` has allowed. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   that the new PEG parser, originally introduced in :pep:`617`, has allowed. The
```

>    improvements that these error messages has been greatly celebrated but

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   improvements that these error messages brought has been greatly celebrated but
```

   separate piece of the parsing machinery. This is specially unfortunate, since
   there are several syntactical features of f-strings that can be confusing due
   to the different implicit tokenization that happens inside the expression
   part (for instance ``f"{y:=3}"`` is not an assignment expression).

#. Other Python implementations have no way to know if they have implemented
   f-strings correctly because contrary to other language features, they are not
   part of the official Grammar [1]_. This is important because several prominent
   alternative implementations such as PyPy are using CPython's PEG parser
   (see [3]_) and/or are basing their Grammars on the official PEG Grammar. The
   fact that f-strings use a separate parser prevents these alternative implementations
   to leverage the official grammar and to benefit to improvements in error messages derived
   from the grammar.

A version of this proposal was originally discussed in Python dev [4]_ and
presented at the Python language summit 2022 [5]_ where it was enthusiastically
received.

Rationale
=========

[Describe why particular design decisions were made.]

TO BE DONE:

> * Describe why we are allowing crazy parenthesis nesting.

Reviewer 2: @pablogsal Do you mean crazy f-string nesting here?

Author: Yeah, apologies. I meant why we are allowing crazy "nest f-strings with the same quotes" as in f"{f"hehe"}"

* Describing how we are limiting nesting.
* Describing other weird choices we made.

Specification
=============

The formal proposed PEG grammar specification for f-strings is (see :pep:`617`
for details on the syntax)::

    fstring
        | FSTRING_START fstring_middle* FSTRING_END
    fstring_middle
        | fstring_replacement_field
        | FSTRING_MIDDLE
    fstring_replacement_field
        | '{' (yield_expr | star_expressions) "="? [ "!" NAME ] [ ':' fstring_format_spec* ] '}' 
    fstring_format_spec:
        | FSTRING_MIDDLE 
        | fstring_replacement_field

Three new tokens are introduced:

* ``FSTRING_START``: This token includes f-string character (``f``/``F``) and the open quote(s).
* ``FSTRING_MIDDLE``: This token includes everything between two expression braces (``}`` and ``{``).

> * ``FSTRING_END``: This token includes everything after the last expression brace the until the closing quote.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``FSTRING_END``: This token includes everything after the last expression brace (or the whole literal part
if no expression exists) until the closing quote.
```

   unfortunately f-strings cannot benefit from them because they are parser in a
   separate piece of the parsing machinery. This is specially unfortunate, since
   there are several syntactical features of f-strings that can be confusing due
   to the different implicit tokenization that happens inside the expression
   part (for instance ``f"{y:=3}"`` is not an assignment expression).

#. Other Python implementations have no way to know if they have implemented
   f-strings correctly because contrary to other language features, they are not
   part of the official Grammar [1]_. This is important because several prominent
   alternative implementations such as PyPy are using CPython's PEG parser
   (see [3]_) and/or are basing their Grammars on the official PEG Grammar. The
   fact that f-strings use a separate parser prevents these alternative implementations
   to leverage the official grammar and to benefit to improvements in error messages derived
   from the grammar.

A version of this proposal was originally discussed in Python dev [4]_ and
presented at the Python language summit 2022 [5]_ where it was enthusiastically
received.

Rationale

> =========

Author: This is the biggest section that is left. Please, @isidentical @lysnikolaou indicate what points you want to work on (or push directly to the branch). Otherwise, if non of you have time this week I will redact something by the weekend

Reviewer: I've pushed my first draft but am unsure if it completely fits as a "rationale" (let me know if there are particular ideas that we want to emphasize more). The main thesis I've used was the initial PEP's lack of formal definition allowed it to be affected by implementation details of CPython's parser, which we can now lift and reduce the burden on people (by lifting the mental burden of all these rules), tooling authors and CPython maintaince. Some of these stuff are already mentioned in the motivation, so I tried to keep it short but I'd be happy to also add other stuff (if you have any suggestions)

Author: Thanks a lot @isidentical! I will review the text soon. Just for clarification: the purpose of this section is to explain the decisions we have made and why we have made them more than why we are making the pep.

Reviewer 2: Pushed a section with a "rationale" (it's basically cause it's more intuitive) for including backslashes in the expression part.

PEP: 3157
Title: Syntactic formalization of f-strings
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Pablo Galindo <pablogsal@python.org>,
        Batuhan Taskaya <batuhan@python.org>,
        Lysandros Nikolaou <lisandrosnik@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Pablo Galindo <pablogsal@python.org>

> Discussions-To: python-dev@python.org

Reviewer 2: Nit: maybe have discussions on Discourse instead? What have you been doing with your latest PEPs?

Author: Ah apologies, yeah discussions are going 100% to discourse 👍

        | '{' (yield_expr | star_expressions) "="? [ "!" NAME ] [ ':' fstring_format_spec* ] '}'
    fstring_format_spec:
        | FSTRING_MIDDLE
        | fstring_replacement_field

Three new tokens are introduced:

* ``FSTRING_START``: This token includes f-string character (``f``/``F``) and the open quote(s).
* ``FSTRING_MIDDLE``: This token includes everything between two expression braces (``}`` and ``{``).
* ``FSTRING_END``: This token includes everything after the last expression brace (or the whole literal part
if no expression exists) until the closing quote.

These tokens are always string parts and they are semantically equivalent to the
STRING token with the restrictions specified. These tokens must be produced by the lexer
when lexing f-strings.  This means that **the tokenizer cannot produce a single token for f-strings anymore**. How
the lexer emits this token is **not specified** as this will heavily depend on every
implementation (even the Python version of the lexer in the standard library is
implemented differently to the one used by the PEG parser).

As an example, ``f'some words {a+b} more words {c+d} final words'`` will be tokenized as::

>     FSTRING_START - "f'"
>     FSTRING_MIDDLE - 'some words '
>     LBRACE - '{'
>     NAME - 'a'
>     PLUS - '+'
>     NAME - 'b'
>     RBRACE - '}'
>     FSTRING_MIDDLE
>     - , string='{'
>     NAME - 'c'
>     PLUS - '+'
>     NAME - 'd'
>     RBRACE - '}'
>     FSTRING_END - ' final words'

Reviewer 2: Is there a typo here?

```suggestion
    FSTRING_START - "f'"
    FSTRING_MIDDLE - 'some words '
    LBRACE - '{'
    NAME - 'a'
    PLUS - '+'
    NAME - 'b'
    RBRACE - '}'
    FSTRING_MIDDLE - ' more words '
    LBRACE - '{'
    NAME - 'c'
    PLUS - '+'
    NAME - 'd'
    RBRACE - '}'
    FSTRING_END - ' final words' (without the end quote)
```

Also, regarding the end quotes not being part of the FSTRING_END token, we probably need to explain this, but also, is it really needed? I can't remember why that is the way it is.

Author: I don't think there is a reason, this is something we carried out from the draft. We probably should change it. I think it just makes easier to produce the final string because we don't need to strip the quotes.

Author: > Is there a typo here?

Yep, apologies there was a bad copy paste. Fixing it

PEP: 3157
Title: Syntactic formalization of f-strings
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Pablo Galindo <pablogsal@python.org>,
        Batuhan Taskaya <batuhan@python.org>,
        Lysandros Nikolaou <lisandrosnik@gmail.com>

> Sponsor: Pablo Galindo <pablogsal@python.org>

Reviewer: Is `Sponsor` applicable when one of the authors is a core dev?

```suggestion
```

Discussions-To: discuss.python.org
Type: Standards Track
Status: Draft
Content-Type: text/x-rst

> Python-Version: 3.9

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python-Version: 3.12
```

Created: 15-Nov-2021

Abstract
========

This document proposes to lift some of the restrictions originally formulated in
:pep:`498` and to provide a formalized grammar for f-strings that can be

> integrated into parser directly. The proposed syntactic formalization of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
integrated into the parser directly. The proposed syntactic formalization of
```

f-strings will have some small side-effects over how f-strings are parsed and
interpreted, allowing for a considerable number of advantages for end users and
library developers, while also improving dramatically the maintainance cost of
the code dedicated to parse f-strings.

Motivation
==========

When f-strings were originally introduced in :pep:`498` the specification was
provided without providing a formal grammar for f-strings. Additionally, the
specification contains several restrictions that are imposed so the parsing of
f-strings could be implemented into CPython without modifying the existing

> lexer. These limitations have been recognized previously and previous attempt

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
lexer. These limitations have been recognized previously and previous attempts
```

#. It is impossible to use the quote character delimiting the f-string
   within the expression portion::

    >>> f'Magic wand: { bag['wand'] }'
                                 ^
    SyntaxError: invalid syntax

#. A previously considered way around it would lead to escape sequences
   in executed code and is prohibited in f-strings::

    >>> f'Magic wand { bag[\'wand\'] } string'
    SyntaxError: f-string expression portion cannot include a backslash

#. Comments are forbidden even in multi-line f-strings::

    >>> f'''A complex trick: {
    ... bag['bag']  # recursive bags!
    ... }'''
    SyntaxError: f-string expression part cannot include '#'

#. Arbitrary nesting of expressions without expansion of escape sequences is
   available in every single other language employing a string interpolation
   method that uses expressions instead of just variable names. [6]_

These limitations serve no purpose from a language user perspective and
can be lifted by giving f-literals a regular grammar without exceptions
and implementing it using dedicated parse code.

The other problems that f-strings have is that the current implementation in

> CPython relies on tokenising f-string as `STRING` tokens and a post processing of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CPython relies on tokenising f-strings as `STRING` tokens and a post processing of
```

applicable Python expression" (in that particular context) without being bound
by the limitations imposed by the details of our implementation.

The formalization effort and the premise above also has a significant benefit from the
eye of Python programmers due to its ability to simplify and eliminate the obscure
limitations. Which reduces the "cognitive" burden and the "mental" complexity of
f-string literals (as well as the Python language in general).

#. The expression component can include any string literal that a normal Python expression
   can include. This opens up the possibility of nesting string literals (formatted or
   not) inside expression component of an f-strings with the same quote type (and length)::

    >>> f"{"hello"}"

    >>> f"{source.removesuffix(".py")}.c: $(srcdir)/{source}"

    >>> f"{f"{f"infinite"}"}" + " " + f"{f"nesting!!!"}"

   This choice not only allows for a more consistent and predictable behavior of what can be
   placed in f-strings but provides an intuitive way to manimulate string literals in a
   more flexible way without to having to fight the limitations of the implementation.

> #. Another issue that has feels unintuitive to most is the lack of support for backslashes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Another issue that has felt unintuitive to most is the lack of support for backslashes
```

   how f-strings can be nested, but the fact that string quotes cannot be reused
   inside the expression component of f-strings made it impossible to nest
   f-strings arbitrarily. In fact, this is the most nested-fstring that can be
   written::

    >>> f"""{f'''{f'{f"{1+1}"}'}'''}"""
    '2'

   As this PEP allows to place **any** valid Python expression inside the
   expression component of the f-strings, it is now possible to reuse quotes and
   therefore is possible nest f-strings arbitrarily::

    >>> f"{f"{f"{f"{f"{f"{1+1}"}"}"}"}"}"
    '2'
   
   Although this is just a consequence of allowing arbitrary expressions, the
   authors of this PEP do not believe that this is a fundamental benefit and we
   have decided that the language specification will not explicitly mandate that
   this nesting can be arbitrary. This is because allowing arbitrary deeply
   nesting imposes a lot of extra complexity to the lexer implementation
   (particularly as lexer/parser pipelines need to allow "untokenizing" to
   support the 'fstrng debugging expressions' and this is specially taxing when
   arbitrary nesting is allowed). Implementations are therefore free to impose a

>    limit on the nesting depth if they need to. Note that this is not a uncommon

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   limit on the nesting depth if they need to. Note that this is not an uncommon
```

>    situation, as the CPython implementation alread imposes several limits all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   situation, as the CPython implementation already imposes several limits all
```

   over the place, including a limit on the nesting depth of parentheses and
   brackets, a limit on the nesting of the blocks, a limit in the number of

>    branches if 'if' statements, a limit on the number of expressions in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   branches in 'if' statements, a limit on the number of expressions in
```

    LBRACE - '{'
    NAME - 'c'
    PLUS - '+'
    NAME - 'd'
    RBRACE - '}'
    FSTRING_END - ' final words' (without the end quote)

while ``f"""some words"""`` will be tokenized simply as::

    FSTRING_START - 'f"""'
    FSTRING_END - 'some words'

All restrictions mentioned in the PEP are lifted from f-literals, as explained below:

* Expression portions may now contain strings delimited with the same kind of
  quote that is used to delimit the f-literal.
* Backslashes may now appear within expressions just like anywhere else in
  Python code. In case of strings nested within f-literals, escape sequences are
  expanded when the innermost string is evaluated.
* Comments, using the '#' character, are possible only in multi-line f-literals,
  since comments are terminated by the end of the line (which makes closing a
  single-line f-literal impossible)

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This PEP is not backwards incompatible: any valid Python code will continue to
be valid if this PEP is implemented and it will not change semantically.

How to Teach This
=================

As the concept of f-strings is already ubiquitous in the Python community, there is

> no fundamental need for users to learn anything new. However, as the formaized grammar

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
no fundamental need for users to learn anything new. However, as the formalized grammar
```

allows some new possibilities, it is important that the formal grammar is added to the

> documentation and explained in detail, explicitly mentioned what constructs are possible

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
documentation and explained in detail, explicitly mentioning what constructs are possible
```

> since this PEP is merging to avoid confusion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
since this PEP is aiming to avoid confusion.
```

It is also beneficial to provide users with a simple framework for understanding what can
be placed inside an f-string expression. In this case the authors think that this work will
make even more simple to explain this aspect of the language since it can be summarized as:

>     You can place any valid Python expression inside an f-string expression".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    "You can place any valid Python expression inside an f-string expression".
```
